HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan. Gwen Ifill
and Judy Woodruff are away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Nearly 10,000 troops will stay
in Afghanistan through 2016, as
President Obama pledges to keep
that country from becoming a
safe haven for terrorists.
Then, following a recent
"Frontline" investigation,
authorities have identified two
new suspects
in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am
jet over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Also ahead, a program to help
inmates stay out of prison.
DONNA ROJAS, American Jobs
Center: How do I live my life
when I go back into the same
community where I may have been
selling drugs and making $1,000
a week, and now you're sending
me out there to
make $8.25 an hour?
HARI SREENIVASAN: We follow
three prisoners on a journey to
get out of jail.
Plus, you might not need as
much sleep as you think.
JERRY SIEGEL, Director, UCLA
Center for Sleep Research:
There's been speculation that
humans
basically used to sleep when it
got dark, which would mean
they'd sleep 10, 11, even
12 hours. But it turns
out that's not the case.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's "PBS
NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: President
Obama announced today he will
keep American troops in
Afghanistan
through the end of his
presidency, extending America's
longest war.
The policy reversal comes after
weeks of worsening violence and
significant gains by Taliban
fighters. We will have more on
the details of the decision
right after the news summary.
Meanwhile, the Associated Press
revealed new details today about
the U.S. airstrike that
killed 22 patients and staff at
a Doctors Without Borders
hospital in Afghanistan. It
said U.S. special operations
analysts knew the Kunduz clinic
was a medical site, but
believed it was being used by a
Pakistani operative coordinating
Taliban activity. Doctors
Without Borders has
disputed that claim.
At the White House, Press
Secretary Josh Earnest said he
wasn't aware of the AP's report,
but
pledged a complete
investigation.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: The president's
expectation is that he will
receive a full accounting of
these facts, in the context of a
thorough, objective and
transparent report from the
Department of Defense.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Pentagon
officials initially said the
strike aimed to protect American
troops during a firefight. But
the top U.S. general in
Afghanistan has since
acknowledged
the strike was a mistake.
Former House Speaker Dennis
Hastert will plead guilty in his
federal hush money case. His
attorney said the plea agreement
will be submitted to the judge
Monday, but stopped short of
detailing the specifics. The
73-year-old Illinois Republican
is charged with violating
banking
laws and lying to the FBI in an
effort to pay someone $3.5
million in a cover-up. Multiple
media outlets reported the
payments concealed claims of
sexual misconduct with an
unnamed
male decades ago.
In economic news, stocks on Wall
Street recorded their steepest
gains in nearly two weeks today.
That was due in part to strong
bank earnings and speculation
the Federal Reserve will hold
off on raising interest rates
until next year. The Dow Jones
industrial average soared 217
points to close at 17141. The
Nasdaq rose 87 points, and the
S&P 500 added 29.
In Syria, government troops
launched a major new offensive
against rebel forces today.
They targeted strongholds in
central Homs province and
captured the town of Khalidiya,
near Hama. The push was backed
by days of Russian airstrikes in
the region. Amateur
video today showed plumes of
smoke rising above towns while
residents sifted through
wreckage.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu said today he's
perfectly open to meeting
with Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas in an effort to
end weeks of bloodshed. That
came a day after Abbas claimed
Israelis executed a 13-year-old
Palestinian boy involved in
a stabbing attack
earlier this week.
The Israeli prime minister
sharply refuted that allegation
today in Jerusalem, insisting
the boy is recuperating
in an Israeli hospital.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister: I think
President Abbas has to stop this
incitement.
You just saw examples of him
lying, bare-faced lies. An
innocent child executed by
Israelis.
No, he's not innocent and he
wasn't executed. He tried to
murder innocent people, almost
succeeded. That's a lie.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At the same
time, the Israeli military
announced today it will deploy
hundreds
more troops throughout Jerusalem
in the coming days in an effort
to boost security there.
Meanwhile, in the West Bank,
Palestinian protesters clashed
with Israeli troops in
Bethlehem.
Demonstrators threw stones as
Israeli forces fired back with
tear gas.
Back in this country, there's
word the FBI has begun an
inquiry into the business
practices
of the multibillion-dollar daily
fantasy sports gambling
industry. Last week, an employee
of the Web site DraftKings won
$350,000 on rival site FanDuel,
spawning allegations of
insider trading. The New York
Times reported the FBI probe
will also assess whether the
sites encourage bets from
players in states where the
contests are illegal.
The preservation group World
Monuments Fund announced its
biennial watch list for
endangered
World Heritage Sites today. The
50 places, spanning 36
countries, include a Spanish
mission
in New Mexico badly in need of
restoration, an ancient
underwater city in Southern
Greece
at risk of pollution from
passing ships, and the entire
country of Nepal, struggling to
protect its heritage in the
aftermath of April's devastating
earthquake.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a new timeline for troop
drawdowns in Afghanistan; a
fresh
lead emerges in the 27-year-old
Lockerbie bomber case; can a
prison break the cycle
of incarceration, and much more.
Now a change of course in
Afghanistan and call for the
United States to stay.
It's already the longest-running
war in American history, and now
U.S. troops will be in
Afghanistan
even longer. The word came today
from President Obama during a
speech in the White House
Roosevelt
Room.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: I have repeatedly
argued against marching
into open-ended military
conflicts that do not serve our
core security interests.
Yet, given what's at stake in
Afghanistan, and the opportunity
for a stable and committed
ally that can partner with us in
preventing the emergence of
future threats, I am firmly
convinced that we should
make this extra effort.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The new war
plan calls for keeping nearly
10,000 troops in Afghanistan
through most of 2016, drawing
down to 5,500 in 2017.
BARACK OBAMA: Now we're
finishing the job we started.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Today's
announcement is an about-face
from the plan laid out last
May, to leave Afghanistan
completely by the end of next
year. It would have left just
a small embassy-based
military presence in Kabul.
But in the last few months,
commanders have signaled that
the Afghans need more help to
beat back the Taliban and hold
onto gains made over the last 14
years. Kunduz, in Northern
Afghanistan, is a case in point.
Taliban fighters briefly took
control there last month. The
New York Times compiled U.N.
data with on-the-ground
reporting that shows the
insurgency has spread
through more of Afghanistan than
at any time since 2001, and more
than half the country's
districts face a substantial,
high, or extreme risk of attack.
There are also now concerns
about the presence of Islamic
State militants.
Defense Secretary Ash Carter:
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: We're adjusting our
presence based on conditions
on the ground to give the United
States and our allies the
capability to sustain a robust
counterterrorism platform,
denying a safe haven for
terrorists and violent extremist
organizations.
HARI SREENIVASAN: U.S. forces
will be stationed in four
locations, Kabul, Bagram,
Jalalabad,
and Kandahar.
President Obama said it's
the right thing to do.
BARACK OBAMA: This decision is
not disappointing. As I have
continually said, my approach is
to assess the situation on the
ground, to figure out what is
working, and figure out
what is not working, and make
adjustments where necessary.
This isn't the first time
those adjustments have been
made. This won't probably be the
last.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The move puts
the decision on how to go
forward in Afghanistan firmly
in the hands of the president's
successor after 2017.
We get more on today's
announcement from Washington
Post reporter Greg Jaffe.
Greg, how did he get
to this decision?
GREG JAFFE, The Washington Post:
You know, in the spring, they
started a review to decide
what they were going to do. The
plan had been to go to
essentially a Kabul-based force,
a small force.
And I think most in the
administration, especially the
president's inner circle, seemed
to think
that that's where they were
going to land. The discussions
carried on through the summer.
In August, General Dempsey came
forward, then the chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff
-- he just recently stepped down
-- with a plan for a sustaining
force of about 5,000
focused on counterterrorism.
And it was then, it seemed to
me, that the debate changed, and
the president seemed open
to that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So what were
the tensions here? Is this
partly the political pressure
of making a campaign promise to
get the country out of this war,
and then the military reality
on the ground, where all his top
advisers are saying something
different?
GREG JAFFE: You know, I don't
think politics played a big role
in it. I think the president
has a real skepticism about
military forces' ability to
effect solutions in places like
Afghanistan, so he's a really
hard sell on these sorts of
issues, just because he doesn't
think military force fixes the
problems, that they're really
political problems. No military
solutions has sort
of become a mantra.
So, it took a lot of convincing
to bring him around, I think.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, if you
have insight to this, what was
the menu card of options
that the generals presented him,
here's A, here's B, here's C?
What were his choices?
GREG JAFFE: You know, I think
that the main choices, as I
understand them, were there
was an option to essentially
stay at 9,800, where they are,
indefinitely.
The real choice and the real
focus of the debate in terms of
a sustaining presence beyond
2016 into 2017 was really this
5,500 option. That was the one
that sucked most of the oxygen
in the room. That was the one
that they really focused on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And so what
were the costs and benefits of
doing either one plan or
increasing
it to 10?
GREG JAFFE: You know, well, 10
is where we are now. And so I
think 10 felt to a lot of
people lets you do things
that you can't do with five.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For example?
GREG JAFFE: Yes, I think that,
in terms of counterterrorism, I
think you can pretty much
do the similar things with both.
What the extra 5,000 gets you
is, it gets you out in the field
with Afghans a little
bit more. You know, we have been
using them. Up in Kunduz, for
example, special forces
helped the Afghans retake that
city by calling in airstrikes
and providing advice.
I think it also gives you a
sense of how Afghans are
performing in other places. I
think we
were all shocked by how fast the
Iraqi forces crumbled and
collapsed. On paper, they looked
pretty good. On paper, the
Afghan forces sometimes look
pretty good. But things like
will and
resolve are really
hard to measure.
And if you're present, you can
get a much better sense of those
things than you can
if you're, you know, hundreds of
miles or thousand of miles away.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is part of
this that nobody has figured out
the equation on how to train
up Afghan forces well enough?
GREG JAFFE: Yes, I think not
just Afghan forces, but all of
these kind of indigenous forces
in these broken societies, where
governments are corrupt or
deeply flawed.
General Dempsey said in an exit
interview -- I thought it was
fascinating -- he essentially
asked himself in this exit
interview with a publication
called "Joint Forces Quarterly,"
you know, can we do this
mission? And he answered his own
question by saying, I don't
know,
but I'm not sure
we have a choice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's the
next step then? If we're keeping
these troop levels at the
same thing, are there going to
be additional perhaps
deployments of special units in
certain
cities?
GREG JAFFE: I think if there are
problems like you saw in Kunduz,
where you have the
Taliban taking the cities and
the Afghans have to retake it, I
think you could see special
forces units embedded with
Afghan units to retake those
kinds of places.
You know, I think it's
interesting way the president
talked about the 9800, or
essentially
10,000. He said that will be the
force through late 2016. You
know, by late 2016, his
successor
will be in place. I think he
could be signaling some
flexibility there, too, that
rather than
go down to 5,500, if his
successor were to say, I really
would be much more comfortable
at 10,000, I think it would be
hard for him not to stay there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Greg Jaffe of The Washington
Post, thanks so much.
GREG JAFFE: Yes. Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Scottish
prosecutors announced today that
they have identified two Libyan
suspects in the 1988 bombing of
a passenger jet over the town of
Lockerbie.
Scotland and U.S. -- Scottish
and U.S. authorities are asking
the Libyan government to allow
Scottish detectives and FBI
officers to interview the
suspects in Tripoli, Libya. The
Washington
Post is reporting, according to
a U.S. official, that the two
individuals are Abdullah
al-Senussi,
a former intelligence chief for
ousted Libyan leader Moammar
Gadhafi, and Abu Agila Mas'ud,
an alleged bomb-maker.
Jeffrey Brown has more.
JEFFREY BROWN: The development
comes just two days after
"Frontline" aired the final
installment of "My Brother's
Bomber," a three-part
documentary by Ken Dornstein
that went back
and reexamined the files
from the Lockerbie case.
Here's a short clip of part
three, where Dornstein is
following the trial in Libya of
former
Gadhafi officials by
the new government.
MAN: In Libya, a trial has begun
for the sons of Moammar Gadhafi
and more than two dozen
of his ex-officials.
KEN DORNSTEIN, Brother of
Lockerbie Bombing Victim: At the
same time in Tripoli, the new
government was continuing its
trial of former Gadhafi
officials.
MAN: The ruler's ex-spy chief,
Abdullah al-Senussi, was among
the defendants fenced off behind
bars from corruption to war
crimes related to the 2011
uprising.
KEN DORNSTEIN: The Libyans were
interested in crimes during the
revolution, but I was
listening at home for details
about the men on my list.
Then, in the middle of the
trial, a photo arrived by e-mail
from Musbah Eter. It was
poor quality and came with no
explanation, but in the center
of the frame was a dark-skinned
man. The blue jumpsuit and
prison bars made it pretty clear
that he was one of the men
on trial in Tripoli, so I went
looking for every photo I could
find of these men on trial.
And there in one of them, behind
Abdullah al-Senussi, the former
intelligence chief,
was the dark-skinned man. The
more I looked, the more photos I
found of him.
I captured these images and sent
them to Musbah Eter in Berlin.
He said this was indeed will
Bob expert, Abu Agila, 100
percent. It was hard to believe
I was now looking at the man
I had been trying to
find for so many years.
But I still wanted more
confirmation. So, I connected
with a human rights worker who'd
been monitoring the
trials in Libya.
WOMAN: Hi, ken.
KEN DORNSTEIN: Hey, how are you?
WOMAN: We can attempt cameras,
but I'm not sure it's going to
last.
KEN DORNSTEIN: I told her who I
was looking for. At first, she
couldn't find Abu Agila's
name on the list, but then:
WOMAN: Wait, wait, wait. Wait. I
have a name. It's just written
slightly differently.
KEN DORNSTEIN: What does
it look like to you?
WOMAN: I think it's defendant
number 28 in this case. So, his
first name is Abu Agila.
That would be his first name.
And as to my understanding, the
biggest case against him
seems to be bomb-making in
relation to the 2011 conflict,
charges of setting up bombs
in vehicles.
KEN DORNSTEIN: Wow.
That sounds like him.
WOMAN: Yes. I would say that's
for sure the same person.
KEN DORNSTEIN: The main trial of
these guys, there's 36, 37 of
them, and they're there
for what is more or
less a show trial.
MAN: Right.
KEN DORNSTEIN: That's
Abdullah Senussi.
MAN: OK.
KEN DORNSTEIN: But if you look
behind Abdullah Senussi...
MAN: There's a dark-skinned man.
KEN DORNSTEIN: There's a
dark-skinned man. You pull all
the images, and you keep finding
a dark-skinned man.
MAN: Right.
KEN DORNSTEIN: But I still would
like to know more. So, I said,
is there -- there's 36 men
on trial. Is there a
charge sheet here?
MAN: Yes, what are they
charged with? Yes.
KEN DORNSTEIN: Number 28 on the
charge sheet. And I translate
it, and you can even grab
it, and put it into Google
Translate, and it's Abu Agila
Mas'ud. And the charge is
bomb-making.
MAN: My goodness.
JEFFREY BROWN: Up until now,
only one person has ever been
convicted in connection with
the Lockerbie bopping.
To talk about today's
development is writer and
filmmaker Ken Dornstein. His
older brother
was killed in the attack.
So, Ken, two new suspects, but
not officially named. Do you
have any information that links
them to the two people that you
identified that we just saw in
that clip?
KEN DORNSTEIN: I don't have any
information from the Scottish
government or from the U.S.
government, but everything I
know about the investigation and
everything I know about
the 36 men being held by the
Libyans would suggest to me that
the two men who have been
alluded to in today's news are
Abdullah Senussi, and the man
who I identified as the bomb
expert
for the Lockerbie case,
Abu Agila Mas'ud.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell us a little
bit about them, first with the
latter, the bomb expert.
What do you know about them?
KEN DORNSTEIN: Yes.
This is a figure who was a
mystery, was a ghost. The
original Lockerbie investigators
had gathered information about
him. There was information about
him from a CIA informant
who was speaking to the CIA in
the months before the bombing,
and in the cables that
were produced from the -- from
the time with that informant.
This person was named. And
this person was named in
connection with Abdel Basset
al-Megrahi, who I think you
mentioned
is the one person who had been
convicted for the bombing.
He was tied to Megrahi at
several key moments in the weeks
and months before the bombing,
including records indicated that
he had been at the airport in
Malta where the bomb was
said to have originated on the
morning of the bombing. The CIA
thought he was a technical
expert, that that's what you
find in the CIA cables.
Beyond that, they didn't know.
They had his landing card when
he landed in Malta, and
it had his fingerprint on it and
there was a passport number, as
any of us who travel
to a foreign country have to
fill out landing cards, where
you say the flight you came in
on and your passport
information. And they had that
passport number.
And, really, that is what clung
to for several years to really
match the fingerprint and
that passport number to a
flesh-and-blood real person who
I felt that, if I could prove
he existed and fully flesh out
who he was, I thought I would
solve any of the remaining
questions there were about
who carried out the bombing.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the other
figure, Abdullah Senussi, was a
more known character, right,
as head of
intelligence in Libya?
KEN DORNSTEIN: Yes. Abdullah
Senussi is a very well-known
figure. He is the brother-in-law
of Moammar Gadhafi. He was
arguably the second most
powerful man in the country at
the time,
at the end of the regime.
He had been linked to many
crimes against Libyans
themselves, including a massacre
at
a prison in the '90s that killed
1,500 people. He also was linked
to a number of foreign
attacks, including the bombing
of a French passenger plane. He
was tried and convicted
in absentia by the French for
bombing a French passenger plane
or for helping conceive of
that.
So, the list of charges against
Senussi is long. The list of
parties who are interested
in having Senussi tell them the
full truth is also long. And he
was well-known. And the
U.S. government may or may not
have already spoken to him. He's
been in detention in various
forms for a number of years, but
it's Abu Agila Mas'ud who really
was the target of
what I did and what
"Frontline" just put out.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, you went
back to look at this, of course,
in part because of the
personal connection, I assume,
but also through a sense that
this was incomplete. Right? What
happened to the investigation?
Do we know whether either of
these characters were ever
spoken to, were
ever investigated?
KEN DORNSTEIN: They both came up
in the original investigation.
That's not new to me.
I started, from a sense, from
the original investigators, most
of whom are now retired,
a sense from them of how
unresolved the whole case was,
that they had a number of people
in their sights. They were only
able to indict two, and after
that indictment, which was
way back in 1991, the FBI would
continue to say that it's an
ongoing investigation, but
there had been no other public
announcements. There had been no
other indictments in the
25 years.
I think that was a source of
frustration to some of the
original investigators. And the
particular character who I
focused on, this Abu Agila
Mas'ud, as the bomb expert, I
think
he was a ghost. I mean, I -- on
the Moby-Dick analogy, he was
the white whale that everyone
was pursuing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
KEN DORNSTEIN: And they never
got a chance to really identify
him.
And I ultimately did.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
Ken Dornstein,
thank you so much.
KEN DORNSTEIN: Sure. Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's
perhaps no greater bipartisan
push today than the effort to
reform
the American criminal justice
system. One of those reforms is
trying to cut back on
recidivism, where criminals
serve their time, but then wind
up back behind bars soon after
their release.
For the past few months, the
"NewsHour" was granted rare
access to a maximum security
prison in Maryland where a
unique pilot program is trying
to stop the revolving door from
spinning.
William Brangham has the story.
CARLOS COLON, Inmate: Mostly,
I'm a thief. I'm a car thief. I
mean, I'm not 100 percent
proud, but at the same time, I
had a good run, I mean, pretty
decent.
ASHLEY WILSON, Inmate: I was
arrested for prostitution,
possession of paraphernalia,
possession of heroin, possession
of marijuana, issuing false
documents, felony theft,
misdemeanor
theft and forgery.
JORDAN TAYLOR, Inmate:
Conspiracy to commit robbery,
wrong place, wrong time, so I
got
conspiracy for it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: These three
prisoners are among the more
than 2.2 million people behind
bars in the U.S. That's more
people locked up than in any
other country.
And like most prisoners, they
will be released back into
society, so making sure they're
ready and that they won't commit
more crimes has become a hugely
important public policy
issue. Over the last few months,
we followed these three
prisoners, Jordan Taylor, Carlos
Colon, and Ashley Wilson, to see
whether one pilot program can
defy the odds, and stop
them from ending up
right back in jail.
ROBERT GREEN, Montgomery County
Correctional Facility: In this
facility today, we have
500 or so individuals. It could
be a lower-level misdemeanor
crime, driving while
intoxicated,
something of that level, to
individuals who have allegedly
killed multiple or allegedly
killed multiple people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Robert Green
is the director of the
Montgomery County maximum
security
facility in rural Maryland. He's
been in corrections over half
his life, and he's the driving
force
behind the program to try and
stop prisoners from going right
back to a life of crime.
ROBERT GREEN: This idea that
solely, solely taking someone's
freedom away changes behavior,
in many cases, it changes it for
the worse. And that's not what
America's correctional
facilities were founded on.
Why would you not want to put
people back on the streets in
your community better than
they came in the door?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He oversees a
program in the jail called the
American Jobs Center.
It's received some pilot federal
funding. It's based on research
that shows that one
of the best ways to reduce
recidivism is to help prisoners
find legitimate work immediately
upon their release. So, they're
taught how to write an effective
resume and how to handle
a job interview.
WOMAN: So tell me what job
you're looking to interview for
today.
MAN: Well, buddy,
you got the job.
JORDAN TAYLOR: All
right, thanks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In this
program, inmates are called
customers, and the program
leaders
are called coaches.
CARLOS COLON: These people, they
actually care, but -- and they
show it. And that's
the reason I'm even trying
to work it 100 percent.
DONNA ROJAS, American Jobs
Center: We're helping them to go
from job-ready to life-ready,
because
getting the job is not the most
difficult part. The hard part is
the life-ready piece.
How do I live my life when I go
back into the same community
where I may have been selling
drugs and making $1,000 a week,
and now you're sending me out
there to make $8.25 an hour?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The grim
details of Ashley Wilson's life
give you a sense of the huge
challenges she's going to
face when she gets out.
ASHLEY WILSON: I was like a
really good student and all
that. So, perfect poster child,
right?
But I had some traumas in my
childhood and some problems
within me.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Like three out
of four incarcerated adults,
Ashley has a history of
substance
abuse. She was 10 when she
started stealing her parents'
vodka. She left home at 15. A
year later, she was
shooting heroin.
ASHLEY WILSON: First time, I had
someone inject it to me. And
from there, it was just off
to the races.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: She began
having sex for money to pay for
her habit, and then she
overdosed,
twice, in between stints in
rehab. Pregnant at 18, she tried
to stay clean for the baby,
but she relapsed again.
ASHLEY WILSON: I had a young
infant, no job, behind on rent,
very little support.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Police caught
her in a sting at 19 and a judge
sentenced her to 18 months
in jail. Ashley's incarceration
was part of the nation's war on
drugs, an unprecedented
10-fold increase in arrests and
prosecutions for nonviolent drug
crimes.
But now, because of good
behavior, Ashley will soon be
transferred to a halfway house,
where she will serve the
remainder of her sentence.
What plans do you have?
ASHLEY WILSON: I need to get a
job. I need to maintain that
job. I need to maintain my
sobriety. I need to get a good,
sober support system to help me.
But along with that comes
the fear, the fear of the
unknown, the fear of inadequacy,
that I can't do it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Staffing a
jobs center, educating
prisoners, treating their
addictions,
it's labor-intensive work. And
while there's a growing
bipartisan support for these
types
of programs, getting prisoners
ready for life after prison is
not cheap.
I have got to imagine that there
are plenty of people outside
these walls who look at
the services you offer here and
think, I would love that in my
community college, I would
love that in my public school,
and yet you're here giving it to
people who have done real
harm in the community.
What do you say to that?
ROBERT GREEN: If we lessen the
burden of the criminal justice
system, doesn't that give
us more money to put into our
schools? Doesn't that give us
more money to put into education
and our community?
JORDAN TAYLOR: I consider myself
a normal person, just played
sports when I was growing
up. Went to school, just like
everybody else did. I got into
some trouble, just like everyone
else did.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Jordan Taylor
is near the end of his one-year
sentence. He violated
probation after serving time for
conspiracy to commit armed
robbery. Two-thirds of young
black men who don't finish high
school will serve time in jail.
And Jordan became another
one of those statistics. He was
arrested just three weeks before
his high school graduation.
JORDAN TAYLOR: You realize who
you are when you're in the cell,
because you have no -- nothing
but time, time to think about
what you're going to do when you
get out, time to think
about anything. There's
nothing but time.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Jordan's been
part of the jobs program for two
months. His release date
is just days away. He says he
wants to get his GED, a job on
day one, and, long term,
study to become an electrician
like his grandfather.
Unlike a lot of prisoners,
Jordan has two loving parents
and a home to live in when
he gets out.
CARLOS COLON: Some people don't
have nowhere to go who leave
here, especially my case,
if you look at it, right? So I
have to depend on me to take
care of what I got to do.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Carlos Colon
has been in and out of
correctional systems since he
was
9 years old. He's now serving a
three-year sentence for
second-degree assault and
burglary.
He was a car thief. He
says he was a good one.
But those are skills that, along
with his long rap sheet, don't
make him very appealing
to possible employers. Carlos
works in the jail's kitchen and
housing units, doling out
meals to inmates. It's unpaid
work, but he can put it on his
resume.
One of the key things this jobs
program does is get inmates
interviews with companies even
before they're released.
MAN: Hey. How you doing, sir?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The company
interviewing Carlos today is a
national firm most of us
have heard of, but they would
only let us film if we didn't
name them. They don't want
their brand publicly
associated with convicts.
MAN: Do you want to do it?
CARLOS COLON: I definitely want
to do it. I would love to do it.
Like, I do need it.
I normally don't get these
types of opportunities.
ROBERT GREEN: We realize, and
the data tells us and the
research tells us, for every day
of employment we lose with that
individual, that the opportunity
for recidivism and returning
to bad choices and bad
behaviors is increased.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For Carlos,
Ashley and Jordan, the odds
aren't in their favor. More than
two-thirds of prisoners are back
behind bars within three years
of their release. Carlos
isn't sure where he will go when
he gets out. Several halfway
houses rejected him because
of a prior prison escape.
Plus, he's also broke.
Do you worry that if you get out
and you can't find a job, you
know you have these criminal
skills -- you're a
good car thief?
CARLOS COLON: Yes, I already
thought about that. Yes, I
already thought about that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: How are
you going to resist that?
CARLOS COLON: I'm going to
resist it for as long as I can,
but it's not guaranteed, because
the time comes and I'm
struggling, I'm not going to be,
like -- you know, I'm not going
to be struggling for long. So,
if I have to steal a car, then
that's what it's going to
have to be.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Tomorrow, we
will show you what happened to
these prisoners when they
got out.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham in Montgomery
County, Maryland.
JORDAN TAYLOR: You all right,
mom? You knew I was going to
home. You knew I was going
to home.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For an early
look at what happened next, go
to our Web site. Our multimedia
project has additional video and
an in-depth look at Ashley,
Carlos and Jordan's stories.
Find that on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
new book details how
entrepreneurs seek to change the
world
for good; what our ancestors can
tell us about how much sleep we
really need; and John Merrow
reflects on the
future of education.
But, first, just how much sleep
do you really need? There's been
plenty of concern, as people
spend more time looking at their
screens ever later into the
night.
Previous research has shown that
a lack of sleep is associated
with a series of problems,
ranging from lack of
concentration to health effects
like obesity and heart disease.
But a new study out today finds
seven or eight hours a night may
not be as essential as we
think.
I went to California
to learn more.
They are among the last
hunter-gatherers in the world,
the Hadza of Northern Tanzania,
the San of Namibia's Kalahari
Desert, and in the Andean
foothills of Bolivia the
Chimane.
By studying the sleep habits of
these three groups, who still
live the way humans have
for thousands of years, a team
of scientists led by UCLA's
Jerry Siegel is challenging
conventional wisdom about
how much sleep we need.
JERRY SIEGEL, Director, UCLA
Center for Sleep Research: It's
absolutely incorrect to think
that the more you sleep, the
healthier you're going to be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The study,
reported today in the journal
"Current Biology" says we in
the industrialized world sleep
as much as our ancestors did.
JERRY SIEGEL: There's been
speculation that humans
basically used to sleep when it
got
dark, which would mean they'd
sleep 10, 11, even 12 hours. But
it turns out that's not
the case. These groups sleep
five, six, seven hours. None of
them average over eight hours
of sleep.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just like us,
when the sun sets, these people
do not go right to sleep.
JERRY SIEGEL: There's a thin
yellow line here that indicates
the light level, and you can
see also that they remain awake.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In fact,
regardless of what time they go
to bed, all three groups, on
different parts of the planet,
wake up exactly when one very
specific thing happens. And,
no, it's not the sunrise.
JERRY SIEGEL: They're sleeping
as the temperature falls, and
they seem to quite consistently
wake up at the lowest point of
temperature in the day. So, when
the temperature stops
falling, that's
when they wake up.
There's been a lot of emphasis
on light and the effects of
light, and there's no question
that light affects sleep. But
light may have been connected to
sleep largely because of
its connection to temperature.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Temperature
swings are a thing of the past.
Now we just have to turn
a dial.
The connections between sleep
and many things have been
thoroughly studied. Thanks to a
smartwatch, I have been a
student for the past
year-and-a-half, trying to
figure out
ways to get a better night's
rest. Between late-night
check-ins at hotel rooms and
early-morning
flights, I have become
a lousy sleeper.
My smartwatch tracks when I'm in
deep sleep, light sleep, REM
sleep, when I move around,
and how many interruptions I
have, and it even gives me a
score for the night. But there
are much more accurate ways
to measure sleep in a lab.
So, for the good of the story, I
put on a hospital gown and
pajamas and got wired up
at the UCLA Sleep
Disorder Center.
That's a lot of wires.
(LAUGHTER)
JOEL RECTOR, UCLA Sleep Disorder
Center: Yes, I believe 32.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lab manager
Joel Rector placed sensors on
specific parts of my head
to measure electrical activity
in my brain, stuck some near my
eyes and on my legs to
measure even the slightest
twitches, and strapped sensors
around my chest and stomach to
gauge
my breaths.
JOEL RECTOR: I'm going to put
this over your shoulder.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Doesn't feel
like the most natural way to go
to sleep.
And I did something I have never
done at work. I tried to fall
asleep on the job.
So, just to run through this,
all these are measuring my brain
waves. This is measuring
my breath and oxygen. This is
measuring how much I'm moving
here and here and on my legs.
And this is measuring my oxygen.
JOEL RECTOR: Yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
JOEL RECTOR: All righty. Well,
I will get the lights off.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Good night.
While I napped, Rector
monitored my patterns.
JOEL RECTOR: He's in stage two
sleep, which is what most people
are in for the majority
of the night. He's kind
of just sleeping quietly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When I woke
up, I had a chat with
neuroscientist Alon Avidan, who
runs the sleep disorders
lab, to tell me what he saw.
DR. ALON AVIDAN, UCLA Sleep
Disorder Center: Typically, when
we ask someone to fall asleep,
we don't see them fall asleep in
less than eight minutes. You
fell asleep in less a minute,
which means that...
(LAUGHTER)
DR. ALON AVIDAN: ... you are
probably sleep-deprived.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What can
happen if you're chronically
sleep-deprived?
DR. ALON AVIDAN: The data shows
that in people who are
chronically sleep-deprived, the
immune
system doesn't work as well.
You're more prone to develop
obesity, diabetes. Cognitive
function
tends to become depressed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But what
constitutes sleep deprivation?
Max Hirshkowitz is chair of the
National Sleep Foundation, and a
guest lecturer at Stanford
Medical School. He recently
convened a panel of experts to
recommend how much sleep we
should get.
MAX HIRSHKOWITZ, National Sleep
Foundation: About seven to nine
hours. It's a range. Now,
six may be appropriate under
unusual circumstances, but,
otherwise, seven to nine,
somewhere in
there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There is no
shortage of pills that try to
deliver those seven to nine
hours.
NARRATOR: Sleep
better, sleep longer.
NARRATOR: There's a land of
restful sleep. We can help you
go there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And
that concerns Siegel.
JERRY SIEGEL: The thing that
alarms me is this thought that
-- and this was the motivation
for undertaking the study, to
find out if this true -- that we
used to sleep much more,
and that we need to increase our
sleep from whatever number we
get to be closer to 10,
11 hours of sleep. The data that
we have gathered indicates
that's not the case.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In fact, these
people Siegel studied average
less than six-and-a-half-hours,
and they seem fine.
JERRY SIEGEL: In general, the
adults are more healthy than
those in our society. They may
for some reason need less sleep,
but there certainly doesn't seem
to be any negative
consequence resulting
from their sleep pattern.
HARI SREENIVASAN: They also
don't appear tired during the
day. They hardly nap and they
sleep
soundly when they do.
JERRY SIEGEL: One thing we found
is that these groups have very
little insomnia, maybe at
a 10th the incidence we have,
and so there's something
different there that's going on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That something
will take more research to
figure out.
So, back to the lab, or,
in this case, back to bed.
Now a look at how individuals
are tackling social issues
around the globe through
innovative
programs, the concept known
as social entrepreneurship.
It's the focus of a new book
called "Getting Beyond Better:
How Social Entrepreneurship
Works." The co-author is Sally
Osberg, president and CEO of the
Skoll Foundation.
For the record, the Skoll
Foundation is an underwriter of
the "NewsHour."
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, sat down with her
in New York, part of our
weekly series Making Sense,
which airs every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: Sally
Osberg, welcome.
SALLY OSBERG, Co-Author,
"Getting Beyond Better: How
Social Entrepreneurship Works":
Thank
you, Paul. It's
wonderful to be here.
PAUL SOLMAN: You write about the
key to social entrepreneurship
being an equilibrium shift.
What do you mean?
SALLY OSBERG: It's a status quo
in which -- which affects
everybody.
But it takes the entrepreneur to
see how to shift that status
quo. Think of Larry Page
and Sergey Brin. There's this
Internet full of information,
and yet there's no ability
for the ordinary person to
search out and retrieve what she
or he wants to know.
They develop a search engine,
Google. The rest is history,
right? The difference is
that the social entrepreneur
also understands that this
equilibrium, this status quo, is
affecting some marginalized
population in some very
significant way, and that
population
very rarely has the power or the
means to effect the transition
on its own. Enter the
social entrepreneur.
PAUL SOLMAN: Like Molly
Melching, whose organization
Tostan, has been working in West
African villages
for 30 years now on human rights
issues, most notably,
eliminating the painful and
dangerous
2,000-year-old practice of
female genital mutilation.
SALLY OSBERG: Something that
seems pretty horrific to many of
us in the West.
PAUL SOLMAN: Disgusting,
even, right?
SALLY OSBERG: Yes. Yes. Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: How dare
you? You're doing what?
SALLY OSBERG: Yes.
But we don't get there by
wagging our fingers at these
populations and saying, how
could
you? It's up to those people
themselves to decide whether
they're going to cut their
daughters or not.
PAUL SOLMAN: And what's the key
to changing people's attitudes
or empowering women?
SALLY OSBERG: It wasn't until
Molly Melching realized that
Senegal had actually signed
onto the conventions to
eliminate all forms of violence
against women that she realized
that these people had rights
they weren't even aware of.
Once they understand they have
these rights, they can begin to
poke their heads up from
this equilibrium, from this
status quo, and determine what's
in their best interest.
PAUL SOLMAN: Another custom
moving quickly from locally
accepted to globally rejected,
child labor, an illegal, but
persistent practice in India's
rug industry.
CHILD (through translator): We
work from 8:00 a.m. until
midnight.
PAUL SOLMAN:
Peace Prize, had been rescuing
children from virtual slavery
for decades, but, says Osberg:
SALLY OSBERG: Kailash understood
that rescuing children wasn't
going to do the job, 20 kids
at a time, when there were 200
who were being trafficked and
brought into these camps, their
tiny little fingers, you know,
tying the knots in these rugs?
He came up with the idea for
a label that would send a clear
signal to consumers that this
rug was made without child
labor.
Target, for example, has just
committed to sourcing all its
handwoven rugs with the
GoodWeave
label. That's an equilibrium
change in motion.
MAN (through
translator): I am free.
SALLY OSBERG: In fact, child
labor in the handwoven carpet
industry in India has come
down from a million children
to something around 200,000.
PAUL SOLMAN: And there are
plenty of higher-tech examples,
like Kiva.
SALLY OSBERG: The founders of
Kiva were among the first social
entrepreneurs to try to create
a technology platform for
micro-lending, creating that
opportunity for ordinary people
to invest
$25, $100, $500 in the
micro-entrepreneurs who were
bootstrapping themselves out of
poverty
in the developing world.
And that actually is what
enabled Kiva to scale.
PAUL SOLMAN: Scale, you
mean to go from small to...
SALLY OSBERG: Right.
PAUL SOLMAN: ... big
with a huge impact.
SALLY OSBERG: From 20,000 people
on the platform, to today
millions of people on the
platform,
millions of lenders, millions of
borrowers, and, of course,
dozens and dozens of
micro-finance
institutions sitting
in the middle.
PAUL SOLMAN: And speaking of
scale, consider APOPO, the
lifesaving non-governmental
organization
that grew out of Bart Weetjens'
childhood fascination with
rodents and his grown-up
realization that the African
giant pouched rat could be
trained to detect land mines.
These are suicide rats?
(LAUGHTER)
SALLY OSBERG: Actually, they're
not, because the rats are much
lighter than, for example,
dogs, who also do this work, but
are -- who are heavy enough to
set off the explosives,
or humans, who are exposing
themselves to risk with, you
know, handheld mine detectors.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, there are
economies of scale to raising
trained rats?
SALLY OSBERG: There are indeed,
because rats multiply quickly,
which is why this solution
is scaling, and why it's gotten
to the point that a country like
Mozambique has declared
itself just this past
September mine-free.
PAUL SOLMAN: As I understand it,
the movement within development
these days is to be able
to measure whether or not a
project is successful. How do
you measure your projects?
SALLY OSBERG: Actually, we rely
upon the social entrepreneurs to
measure the difference that
they are making.
So, a Molly Melching, 7,000
Senegalese villages who have
publicly renounced the practice
of
female genital cutting, that's
evidence. APOPO's unit of
analysis, a cleared square meter
of
mined land. That's evidence.
PAUL SOLMAN: But if you're
relying on the social
entrepreneurs, and they're
asking you
for money, aren't they going to
tell you what you want to hear?
SALLY OSBERG: They don't. People
think there's no accountability
for philanthropy.
But when you're working with
social entrepreneurs, they will
tell us when we're
undercapitalizing
them, they will tell us when our
expectations for measurement or
for -- for documentation
are out of line. They give
us feedback no-holds-barred.
PAUL SOLMAN: Is that because
they already know they're doing
something so virtuous that
they don't need to be defensive
in asking you for more money for
it?
SALLY OSBERG: Actually, they
understand that there is no
argument for philanthropy
without
what they are doing, without
their work on the front lines
driving change. And they're
right.
PAUL SOLMAN: Sally Osberg,
thank you very much.
SALLY OSBERG: Thank you, Paul.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally
tonight: a career of covering
education and some of the
observations
learned along the way.
John Merrow has been a special
correspondent for education for
the "NewsHour" for more
than three decades now, covering
everything from the importance
of reading to young children,
to battles over reform, to the
rising price of higher
education.
He's now retiring.
And Judy Woodruff sat down with
him recently to discuss his
career.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John
Merrow, welcome.
JOHN MERROW: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you have had
quite a career. Take us back.
How did it all begin? You were
a teacher.
JOHN MERROW: I was a high school
teacher. I went off to graduate
school.
I got hired by a think tank in
Washington. I don't have the
capability of sitting around
thinking. My boss said, start a
forum, told me I could spend
$10,000. I knocked on the
door of National Public Radio,
which was brand-new, said, I had
10 -- they said, come on in.
And I stayed for eight years,
and then ended up coming over
here, and stayed here for a
long, long time as well,
41 years altogether, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's an amazing
journey, John Merrow. You have
done so many extraordinary
reports for the "NewsHour."
As I think about, if there's
been any kind of a common theme
over that time what, would
you say it is? I mean, I think
of reform. It's just
something...
JOHN MERROW: Reform is it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... that
keeps coming back.
JOHN MERROW: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do
you think about that?
JOHN MERROW: I think
you're absolutely right.
We started -- the first real
wave of education reform was
1983, with the publication of "A
nation at Risk" that warned we
were drowning in a rising tide
of mediocrity. We have been
reforming ever since.
Here it is 2015.
In fact, I'm writing a book
called "Addicted to Reform," a
12-step program that -- get
us out of it. But -- and we have
made some great improvements.
Public Law 94-142, Education
for All Handicapped Children Act
of 1975 changed things for
millions of children.
We're not -- got a long we way
to go yet, but that's a great
improvement. People forget
we have made a lot
of improvements.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back when
the term was handicapped.
JOHN MERROW: Handicapped,
exactly, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Handicapped
children. Of course, it's
changed since then.
But there are so many milestones
along the way. I mean, I think
of No Child Left Behind,
14 -- what, 14 years ago,
under President Bush.
JOHN MERROW: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you think
about when you think about
milestones?
JOHN MERROW: Well, that law
expired a long time ago, but the
Congress is so divided,
it has been unable to create new
legislation. They're still
trying.
But that law has been -- done a
lot of damage, because it said
everybody is going to be
proficient
by 2014. Well, nowhere near, but
then it started imposing
penalties. The current secretary
of education has been granting
waivers, saying, you don't have
to follow that, but he has
said, you have to do these
things, which has created a
whole new thing called Race to
the
Top, which, with the Common Core
-- I mean, and we're so
polarized now, that these are
stories that reporters are
going to keep on telling.
But I don't think they're really
helping schools in a lot of
ways.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We do seem to be
talking about education more,
though, today as a country.
I mean, we don't -- we don't
seem to take it for granted, the
way we used to.
JOHN MERROW: We talk
a lot about it.
We -- I think, Judy, that we ask
the wrong question,
fundamentally. And this is sort
of a bumper sticker way of
thinking about it. But I think
the system looks at each child
and says, how intelligent are
you, how intelligent are you,
and then tests, whereas the
question
we really -- it seems like we
ought to be asking is, how are
you intelligent, how are
you intelligent, and then figure
out a way to build on what --
the strengths that kid
has, which you can do
with technology today.
I mean, we have the potential to
transform public education.
Whether we do it is an open
question.
OK, you ready to
read this story?
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have been in
so many classrooms around this
country. Is there a moment or
moments you think more
about than any other?
JOHN MERROW: I think back on --
we followed -- for the
"NewsHour" back in 2000,
followed
five first-year teachers for a
whole year. Jim Lehrer used to
call it the PBS version
of "Survivor."
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN MERROW: And then there were
some remarkable times then, as
those young people did their
best without much training.
WOMAN: I want everyone to raise
their hands now. You guys don't
want to learn much of
anything, do you?
JOHN MERROW: We followed New
Orleans since Katrina for --
actually for six years, followed
Michelle Rhee in Washington,
D.C., for three years.
So, there were some
memorable moments there.
MICHELLE RHEE, Former
Chancellor, District Of Columbia
Public Schools: I'm terminating
your principalship now.
I think that, when you're doing
the kind of work I'm doing in
public education, where
the lives and futures of
children hang in the balance,
you cannot -- you can't -- you
can't play with that.
JOHN MERROW: She became the face
of a kind of what you would call
test-based accountability,
which was using test scores to
judge teachers. Most countries
use test scores to judge
students,
and tests are designed to
measure what students are doing.
But we, I think, alone among
advanced
countries use them to fire or
hire or evaluate teachers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think the
question a lot of people would
like to ask you, John Merrow,
given all the time you have
spent looking at our schools, is
-- is, are they as bad
as the worst critics
say they are?
JOHN MERROW: No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Or are they as
good as some of their fierce
defenders say they are?
JOHN MERROW: Judy, I would say
that probably a third of our
schools are better than schools
have ever been in this country.
But that creates a real problem.
We tend to focus on the
achievement gap, and we say,
well, you know, there's this big
difference between whites and
non-whites and so on. It
would be useful if we talked
about an opportunity gap, and
maybe even an expectations gap,
because
if you close the opportunity gap
and the expectations gap, I have
a hunch the outcomes would take
care of themselves.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What should the
focus be for the future? I mean,
as you go off to do other
projects, what should parents,
what should schools -- what
should the priority be now?
JOHN MERROW: I think there are
two terms that are floating
around. One is called blended
learning, which is excellent
teachers using technology. And
the other is what they call
deeper learning, which is really
digging deeply into things.
Kids -- you and I, even our own
children, went to school, you
had to go to school because
that's where they kept the
knowledge. Today's kids are
growing up in a sea of 24/7. But
it's information, not knowledge.
So, schools need to be teaching
kids how to ask questions. How
do you figure out what's
true? Instead, too many of our
schools get kids regurgitating.
So what we have to do
is get away from regurgitation.
It's Aristotle. We are what we
repeatedly do.
If we repeatedly fill in
bubbles, that is not much of a
preparation for the future.
Kids need to be taught to -- not
to be cynical, but to be
skeptical, to look for evidence.
They need to be taught
to be good journalists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Merrow, you
have taught us so much about
education.
Thank you. It doesn't do it
justice, but we thank you.
JOHN MERROW: This has been a
great ride, Judy. The "NewsHour"
is the best. Thank you very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're
going to miss you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Although John
is retiring, the "NewsHour"'s
coverage of education issues
continues, of course.
And that includes a new
partnership with Education Week.
John's colleagues at Learning
Matters
have joined Education Week and
will bring regular reports from
the nation's classrooms
and communities on important
issues from kindergarten up
through higher education.
On the "NewsHour" online:
Astronaut Sally Ride showed
millions of young girls and boys
that they, too, could reach the
stars by learning science. But
behind the icon was a private
person with a curious nature,
and that is part of a new
photobiography by Tam
O'Shaughnessy,
Ride's life and
business partner.
We spoke with Tam, who shared
many photos from the collection.
And you can see those
on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.